---
title: 8. Recommender System
---
# 8. 0 Introduction
---
A recommender system is an algorithm that recommends items likely to receive positive responses based on information about users and items.

For example, in a movie recommendation system, user-informations may include the user's rating or whether the user has pressed 'LIKE' button. Item-informations can include genre or actors. Followings are notations to use this time:

$n_u$ : number of users
$n_i$ : number of movies
$r(i,j)$ : 1 if user $j$ rated movie $i$ or 0
$y^{(i,j)}$ : rating given by user $j$ to movie $i$
$n$ : number of features
$w^{(j)},b^{(j)}$ : parameters for user $j$
$x^{(i)}$ : feature vector for movie $i$
$m^{(j)}$ : number of movies rated by user $j$

Ideally, if the characteristics of each movie (genre, actor, director, year, etc.) are sufficiently reflected as features then the user's rating can be predicted using the following linear regression model.

Model that predict rating of user $j$ to movie $i$ :
$$
w^{(j)}\cdot x^{(i)}+b^{(j)}
$$

The cost of user $i$ is as follow :

$$
min_{w^{(j)},b^{(j)}}J(w^{(j)},b^{(j)})=\sum_{i:r(i,j)=1}\cfrac{1}{2}\left(w^{(j)}\cdot x^{(i)}+b^{(j)}-y^{(i,j)}\right)^2+\cfrac{\lambda}{2}\sum^n_{k=1}\left(w^{(j)}_k\right)^2
$$
, where the second term is for regularization.

So, fit parameters as follow :
$$
J
\begin{pmatrix}
w^{(1)},\cdots,w^{(n_u)}\\
b^{(1)},\cdots,b^{(n_u)}
\end{pmatrix}
=\cfrac{1}{2}\sum^{n_u}_{j=1}\sum_{i:r(i,j)=1}\cfrac{1}{2}\left(w^{(j)}\cdot x^{(i)}+b^{(j)}-y^{(i,j)}\right)^2+\cfrac{\lambda}{2}\sum^{n_u}_{j=1}\sum^n_{k=1}\left(w^{(j)}_k\right)^2
$$
for all users.

Then we can recommend the item predicted over threshold to specific user.

Now let's take a look at advanced techniques.

# 8. 1 Colaborative Filtering
---
Collaborative filtering is ~~
## 8. 1. 1 Model-Based Filtering
---
> Problem Motivation : If a new movie has released and there is no information about it, so the above model cannot predict ratings.
> Intuitive Solution :Derive features from users' ratings. 

 There is no feature for the item $i$, so will it features of the item.

Given $w^{(1)}$, $b^{(1)}$,$\cdots$, $w^{(n_u)}$, $b^{(n_u)}$, the cost for $x^{(i)}$ is as follow:

$$
J\left(x^{(i)}\right)=\sum_{i:r(i,j)=1}\cfrac{1}{2}\left(w^{(j)}\cdot x^{(i)}+b^{(j)}-y^{(i,j)}\right)^2+\cfrac{\lambda}{2}\sum^n_{k=1}\left(w^{(j)}_k\right)^2
$$

Furthermore, it's also possible to construct the latent factors, referred to features, from bottom up as follow:

$$
\min_{w,b,x}J(w,b,x)=\cfrac{1}{2}\sum_{(i,j):r(i,j)=1}\left(w^{(j)}\cdot x^{(i)}+b^{(j)}-y^{(i,j)}\right)^2+\cfrac{\lambda}{2}\sum^{n_u}_{j=1}\sum^{n}_{k=1}\left(w^{(j)}_k\right)^2+\cfrac{\lambda}{2}\sum^{n_m}_{i=1}\sum^{n}_{k=1}\left(x^{(i)}_k\right)^2
$$

By optimizing not only $w$, $b$, but also $x$, we can build a model-based recommender system.

If the target values are binary labels-favs, likes, clicks,...-, in that case, use sigmoid function as follow:

$$
\begin{aligned}
y^{(i,j)} &:f_{w,b,x}=g(w^{(j)}\cdot x^{(i)}+b^{(j)}) \\
Loss &:L(f_{
w,b,x)},y^{(i,j)})=-y^{(i,j)}\log{f_{w,b,x}}-(1-y^{(i,j)})\log{1-f_{w,b,x}} \\
\end{aligned}
$$
## 8. 1. 2 Baseline Prediction
---
>Problem Motivation : New user has no rating for any item.
>Intuitive Solution : Recommend generally popular items.

Let $\mu_i$ be the mean of ratings for the item $i$, then following holds:
$$
\underset{(1)}{\begin{pmatrix}
y^{(1,1)} & y^{(1,2)} & \cdots & y^{(1,n_u)} \\
y^{(2,1)} & y^{(2,2)} & \cdots & y^{(2,n_u)} \\
\vdots & \vdots &  & \vdots \\
y^{(n_m,1)} & y^{(n_m,2)} & \cdots & y^{(n_m,n_u)} \\
\end{pmatrix}}
=
\begin{pmatrix}
\mu_1 \\
\mu_2 \\
\vdots \\
\mu_{n_m} \\
\end{pmatrix}
+
\underset{(2)}{\begin{pmatrix}
y^{(1,1)}-\mu_1 & y^{(1,2)}-\mu_1 & \cdots & y^{(1,n_u)}-\mu_1 \\
y^{(2,1)}-\mu_2 & y^{(2,2)}-\mu_2 & \cdots & y^{(2,n_u)}-\mu_2 \\
\vdots & \vdots &  & \vdots \\
y^{(n_m,1)}-\mu_{n_m} & y^{(n_m,2)}-\mu_{n_m} & \cdots & y^{(n_m,n_u)}-\mu_{n_m} \\
\end{pmatrix}}
$$
 
If we use (1) for new user $\alpha$, since $\nexists(i,\alpha)$ s.t. $r(i,\alpha)=1$, the error term equals to zero, only minimizes the regularization term for weights so, weight vector converges to zero vector.

Instead of this, use (2) and predict for user $\alpha$, on item $i$ as $w^{(\alpha)}\cdot x^{(i)}+b^{(\alpha)}+\mu_i$, that is prediction is equal to the mean of all ratings of item $i$.

## 8. 1. 3 Finding Related Item : Similarity
---
We can recommend to user $i$  item $j$ which $\hat{y}^{(i,j)}$ is larger than threshold. But in some cases, you may recommend the item that is similar to some items that has been rated positively.

Suppose that $k$-th movie was rated positively. Then by calculating Euclidean distance between feature vectors of movie $k$ and $i$, we can see the **similarity** between movie $k$ and $i$ as follow:

$$
\sum^n_{l=1}\left(x^{(k)}_l-x^{(i)}_l\right)^2=||x^{(k)}-x^{(i)}||^2
$$
This similarity method is way more interpretable and intuitive.
## 8. 1. 4 Memory-Based Filtering : Item-Based
---
link
## 8. 1. 5 Memory-Based Filtering : User-Based
---
link
# 8. 2 Content-Based Filtering
---
>Intuitive Solution : Recommend items to a user on features of user and item to find good matches.

For example,
	User vector for the user $j$, $x^{(j)}_n$ may contain :
		- Age,
		- Gender,
		- Country,
		- Watched Movies, ...
	Movie vector for the movie $i$, $x^{(i)}_m$ may contain :
		- Year,
		- Genre,
		- Reviews,
		- Average Rating, ...
Since user-information and item-information are collected separately, two sizes of above vectors can be different. So, we will remake $v^{(j)}_u$ and $v^{(i)}_m$ which are same size, say $c$, from $x^{(j)}_u$ and $x^{(i)}_m$, respectively.
## 8. 2. 1 DL for Content-Based Filtering
---
Sketching the forward propagation of above process is as follow:

$$
\begin{aligned}
\begin{matrix}
x_u\rightarrow\underset{u_1\text{ units}}{\text{layer}}\rightarrow\cdots\rightarrow\underset{\text{"c units"}}{\text{layer}}\overset{v_u}{\searrow} &\\
x_m\rightarrow\underset{m_1\text{ units}}{\text{layer}}\rightarrow\cdots\rightarrow\underset{\text{"c units"}}{\text{layer}}\underset{v_m}{\nearrow} &
\end{matrix}
\text{dot product}\rightarrow\text{prediction}
\end{aligned}
$$

Without separating prediction into $v_u$ and $v_m$, compute the cost $J$ as follow:

$$
J=\sum_{(i,j):r(i,j)=1}\left(v^{(j)}_u\cdot v^{(i)}_m-y^{(i,j)}\right)^2+(\text{NN Reg})
$$

By finding $i$ that minimize similarity between positive-rated item $k$, we can list up the ranking of recommendable items as follow:

$$
\min_i||v^{(k)}_m-v^{(i)}_m||^2
$$
This can be also pre-calculated in DL process. Once the DL model is built, $x_m$ can be transformed into $v_m$ without $x_u$. Then as long as the user serve information, inner product with $v_m$ can immediately give recommendation.

# 8. 3 Retrieval & Ranking
---
If embedded model is static, calculating all similarity can be conducted in offline for an enormous items. Instead of this, we can try following steps:

1. Retrieval Step
	Generate broad scales of plausible item candidates.
		1. For each of the last 10 movies watch by the user, find 10 most similar movies.
		2. For most viewed 3 genres, find top 10.
		3. Find top 5 movies in user's country.
		4. Trending top 5 movies.
		5. ...
	
	In this step, we get an naive, fast similarity for **high recall** for plausible candidates.
	
	Integrate these with a candidate pool and, remove  duplicates, already shown, etc.
	
2. Ranking Step
	With retrieved movie list, rank using a model.
	
	For **high precision**, detailed similarity model is needed.

Retrieving more candidates can give more plausible recommendation but the model gets slower. To analyze and optimize the trade-off, carry out offline experiment.

# 8. 4 Cold Start
---

